SQUARE ENIX. 


WARNING: READ BEFORE USING YOUR PLAYSTATION®2 COMPUTER 
ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEM. 

Avery small percentage of individuals may experience epileptic seizures 
when exposed to certain light patterns or flashing lights. Exposure to certain 
patterns or backgrounds on a television screen or while playing video 
games, including games played on the PlayStation 2 console, may induce 
an epileptic seizure in these individuals. Certain conditions may induce 
previously undetected epileptic symptoms even in persons who have no 
history of prior seizures or epilepsy. If you, or anyone in your family, has an 
epileptic condition, consult your physician prior to playing. If you experience 
any of the following symptoms while playing a video game — dizziness, 
altered vision, eye or muscle twitches, loss of awareness, disorientation, 
any involuntary movement, or convulsions — IMMEDIATELY discontinue use 
and consult your physician before resuming play. 


WARNING TO OWNERS OF PROJECTION TELEVISIONS: 
Do not connect your PlayStation 2 console to a projection TV without first 
consulting the user manual for your projection TV, unless it is of the LCD 
type. Otherwise, it may permanently damage your TV screen. 


USE OF UNAUTHORIZED PRODUCT: 

The use of software or peripherals not authorized by Sony Computer 
Entertainment America may damage your console and/or invalidate your 
warranty. Only official or licensed peripherals should be used in the 
controller ports or memory card slots. 


HANDLING YOUR PLAYSTATION 2 FORMAT DISC: 

¢ This disc is intended for use only with PlayStation 2 consoles 

with the NTSC U/C designation. 

Do not bend it, crush it or submerge it in liquids. 

Do not leave it in direct sunlight or near a radiator or other source of heat. ¢ 
Be sure to take an occasional rest break during extended play. 

Keep this compact disc clean. Always hold the disc by the edges and 

keep it in its protective case when not in use. Clean the disc with a lint- 

free, soft, dry cloth, wiping in straight lines from center to outer edge. 

Never use solvents or abrasive cleaners. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


4 


6 


GETTING STARTED 


4 General Controls 
BASIC CONTROLS 
5 Battle Controls 


STARTING A GAME 
6 — Adjusting Settings 
Saving and Loading 
Exiting a Game 
Game Over 
STORY 
DRAMATIS PERSONAE 
EXPLORING IVALICE 
VIEWING MAPS 
TRAVELING THE WORLD 
THE PARTY MENU 
LICENSES 
OBTAINING LICENSES 
23 Espers and Quickenings 
23. Mist 
GAMBITS 
25. Gambit Configuration 
BATTLE 
TIPS 


EXPLORING RABANASTRE 
34  Rabanastre Shopping Guide 
35 Your Clan 


GETTING STARTED 


open button 
MEMORY CARD slot 2 
MEMORY CARD slot 1 


disc cover 

on/standby/ 

reset button 
rer =r a 


rome! | 3 receiver 


USB connectors 


controller port 1 
controller port 2 
Set up your PlayStation®2 computer entertainment system according to the instructions 
supplied with your system. Check that the system is turned on (the on/standby indicator is 
green). Press the OPEN button to open the disc cover. Place the FINAL FANTASY® XII disc 
with the label side facing up in the disc holder, and then close the disc cover. Attach game 
controllers and other peripherals as appropriate. Follow the on-screen instructions and refer to 
this manual for information on using the software. 


MEMORY CARD (8MB)(FOR PLAYSTATION®2) 


To save game settings and progress, insert a memory card (8MB)(for PlayStation®2) into MEMORY 
CARD slot 1 of your PlayStation®2 system. You can load saved game data from the same memory 
card or any memory card (8MB)(for PlayStation®2) containing previously saved games. 


GENERAL CONTROLS 
© button 


| * Confirm a selection 

* Talk with a nearby NPC (you can only talk with NPCs who have a talk icon displayed above them) 

* Inspect an object (an action icon will appear above your head when you approach a sign, door, 
treasure chest, or other interactive object) 


® button * Cancel 
+ Return to the previous menu screen 


®butcon . Display the Party Menu 
| * Display the conversation log (a @ will appear in the log window when this option is available) 
| * Scroll quickly through lists in the Party Menu, etc. (when pressed in conjunction with the up/down 


® button 


| Run (when fully tilted) 


right analog stick | * Move camera 


[EEE buttons» Change pages. 


button | * Toggle zoom 


GER button | * Zoom in and out of the map and license board 


® Button 


| * Return camera to default position behind character (this can also ‘be done manually using the right 
| analog stick) 


2 burton ‘ | * Pause the game 


|, button 


|* Display a map of your current location 


BASIC CONTROLS — 


DU OCK"2 ANALOG CONTROLLER CONFIGURATIONS 
L2 button —_—— R2 button 
L1 button —————— R1 button 
directional 
buttons 
A button 
left analog stick - © button 
(L3 button when pushed down) 
SELECT button = x button 
ANALOG mode button O button 
START button 


right analog stick - — 
(R3 button when pushed down) 


BATTLE CONTROLS 
Please note that this game may be incompatible with controllers other than the DUALSHOCK®2?2 analog controller. 
© button * Display the Battle Menu 


* Inspect an object (an action icon will appear above your head when you approach a sign, door, 
treasure chest, or other interactive object) 


® button * Cancel 
* Return to the previous menu screen 


® button arf i: Display the Party Menu 

® button . Display/close the Battle Menu 

B/S) = / => buttons le Move the menu cursor 

P/F butons 

/—> buttons | |» Target a foe, ally, or NPC kal 


shange party leader (can only be used when the Battle Menu is not open) 


left analog stick * Walk (when slightly tilted) 
* Run (when fully tilted) 


right analog stick * Move camera 


M /GGEB buttons * Change target group (use to toggle between allies and foes when issuing battle commands) 


button * Lock on wo a target (while pressed down, the camera will center on the target the party leader 
is currently engaging) 


GES button Flee from battle (pre: 


® button Return camera to default position behind party leader (this can also be done manually using 
the right analog stick) 


| * Pause the game 


this and run to attempt to escape from battle) 


* Display a map of your current location 


During play, the controller always remains in analog mode, as indicated by the illuminated red LED. 
The vibration function can be turned ON/OFF in the Config section of the Party Menu. 
The controller will only function when inserted into controller port 1. 


STARTING A GAME 


After the game has been loaded in accordance with the 
instructions given on page 4 of this manual, a demo 

F| NA | Fh \ Th i i {ll movie will play, after which the FINAL FANTASY XII 

Siw, oe title Screen will appear. Pressing the @ button during the 

demo movie will also call up the title screen. Select “New 

Game” if you wish to start FINAL FANTASY XII from 


the beginning. Select “Load Game” if you wish to 
continue playing from a previously saved game. 


ADJUSTING SETTINGS 


When starting a new game, you will be given the option to adjust the config settings. 


¢ Controller Vibration 

Toggle the DUALSHOCK®2 analog controller's vibration function ON/OFE 

* Screen Shake 

There are scenes during the game where the screen shakes. Use this setting to turn the effect 
ON/OFE 

¢ Subtitles 

Turn cut-scene subtitles ON/OFF. 

* Screen Size 

Set the screen size to normal (4:3) or widescreen (16:9) aspect ratio. 

¢ Flicker Filter 

Turn the screen flicker filter ON/OFF. 

¢ Sound 

Change the game audio to monaural, stereo, or Dolby® Pro Logic II. 

* Screen Position 

Adjust the horizontal and vertical position of the display using the directional buttons. A guide 
is also provided to help you adjust screen brightness. 

* Restore Defaults 

Restore all settings to their default values. 


The above settings can also be adjusted at any time from the Config section of the Party Menu. When you have finished 
adjusting the settings, select “Begin the Game” to start your adventure. 


SOUND SETTINGS 


Adjusting the sound settings to match your audio environment will further enhance your 
gameplay experience. 


* Monaural 


Suitable for audio/video equipment without stereo input/output. 


Suitable for audio/video equipment with 2-channel input/output. 

* Dolby® Pro Logic II 

This game is presented in Dolby® Pro Logic II. To experience FINAL FANTASY XII in 
dynamic surround sound, connect your game console to a sound system with Dolby® Pro 


Logic (for 4 channel sound) or Dolby® Pro Logic II (for 5 channel sound) decoding. 


Please refer to your sound system's instruction manual for further details. 
Dolby, Pro Logic, and the double-D symbol are trademarks of Dolby Laboratories. 


SAVING AND LOADING 


* Saving 

At least 100KB of space is required on a memory card (8MB)(for PlayStation®2) in order to 
save your game. Refer to page 15 on how to save your game while playing. 

* Loading 

To continue playing from a previously saved game, select Load Game at the title screen and 
choose the MEMORY CARD slot that contains your data. After selecting the slot, your save 
file(s) will appear on the screen. Choose the one you wish to load and press the @ button. 
Insert a memory card (8MB)(for PlayStation®2) into either MEMORY CARD slot to save or load data. 


EXITING A GAME 


To end a game, press the START button to pause. While paused, pressing the @ button will 
return you to the title screen. Please note that exiting the game in this manner will not save 
your data. Make sure to save your progress before quitting. 


GAME OVER 


When all of your characters have been KO’d or otherwise incapacitated, the game will end and 
return to the title screen. Select Load Game to resume play from your most recent save point. 


A WORLD CALLED IVALICE... 


AN AGE WHEN MAGICK WAS COMMONPLACE 
AND AIRSHIPS PLIED THE SKIES... 


OUR TALE BEGINS. 


As war looms on the horizon, the mighty Archadian Empire 
begins a campaign to subjugate its neighbors. The small 
kingdom of Dalmasca shares their fate. 

Two years after its fall, in the capital city of Rabanastre, the 
people line the streets to wait for the appointment of the new 
consul from Archadia. 

To Vaan, a young man living on the streets of Rabanastre, the 
Empire is a hated enemy who took the life of his brother, the 
only family he had left. Vaan hatches a plot to break into the 
palace and take back the spoils of conquest from Dalmasca’s 
occupiers. 

He gets more than he bargained for when he meets Princess 
Ashe, the sole surviving heir to the Dalmascan throne, thought 
dead since the war. 

Our story follows Ashe, Vaan and his friend Penelo, the sky 
pirate Balthier, and his partner Fran. Accompanying them is 
Basch, a captain of the Dalmascan army who turned traitor and 
slew his king. 

Join them on an adventure spanning Ivalice that traces the 


mysteries behind the Archadian Empire's invasion. 


VAAN 
HUME, 17 YEARS OLD 


A boy who sees freedom in the skies. 


Living in the Rabanastre slums, Vaan maintains an air of hope even under the oppressive rule 
of the Empire. But he longs for more: a life without borders or authority. He dreams of 
becoming a sky pirate, free to go where he will. 


ASHE 


HUME, 19 YEARS OLD 
A princess who had lost everything. 


The only child of King Raminas and sole heir to the Dalmascan throne, Ashe is believed dead 
following the invasion. She meets Vaan and the others under the most unlikely of 
circumstances. 

Ashe knows all too well she lacks the power to right the wrongs committed against her and 
her kingdom, but she will not allow herself to admit defeat. 


BASCH 


HUME, 36 YEARS OLD 
A loyal knight branded as traitor. 


A captain in the Order of the Knights of Dalmasca, Basch achieved renown as a gallant and 
brave hero credited with countless victories on the battlefield. He is a man of justice who 
cannot abide inequity. 

Unlike the other captains, who are chosen from the aristocracy, Basch is of common blood 
and enjoys the love of the people, until he inexplicably murders the King on the eve of a treaty- 
signing with Archadia. He is led away in chains. 

What could drive so loyal a man to slay his oathsworn liege? 


PENELO 


HUME, 17 YEARS OLD 


Vaan’s friend. 


Like Vaan, Penelo calls Rabanastre’s Lowtown home. She watches over Vaan, trying to keep 
him from getting into too much trouble. 

Though she lost her family in the war with the Empire, Penelo is ever cheerful, making her 
way by doing odd jobs in and around the city. 

She enjoys the lighter side of life, but Penelo is not altogether unfamiliar with battle. While 
she remains untested in a true fight, her brothers, who belonged to the Order, taught her the 
fundamentals of combat. 

Penelo believes that in perseverance, there is hope. 


BALTHIER 


HUME, 22 YEARS OLD 
A dashing sky pirate. 


He would describe himself as a noble thief, stealing only from those who deserve it. He goes 
where he pleases, swearing fealty to no one. 

While roaming the skies of Ivalice with Fran, his viera partner, he still makes time to charm 
the ladies with his silver tongue and put wrongs to right—grinning all the while. 


FRAN 
VIERA, AGE UNKNOWN 


A master of weapons. 


A viera warrior, Fran is as much at ease with a sword as she is her bare hands. Her proficiency 
with a blade is matched only by her skill with a Tee. as she also handles the maintenance of 
Balthier's airship, the Strahl. . 

The lifespan of the viera is far greater than that of humes, and many secrets lie hidden in 
her long history. Yet, the divide of race does nothing to diminish the bond of trust between her 
and Balthier. ” 


= a 


ATAOI 


ll 


EXPLORING IVALICE 


Ivalice spans three main continents: Valendia, Ordalia, and Kerwon. Here is some advice to 
help you on your travels: 


Use the left analog stick to move your character. Tilt the stick slightly to walk, and fully to run. 


Use the right analog stick to rotate the camera around the party leader. Pressing the ® button 
will reset the camera directly behind the party leader. You can also lock and center the camera 
on the party leader’s current target by holding down the a— button. 


Adjusting the camera during battle allows you to confirm the positions of your other party members, 


as well as scan the surrounding area for foes. Using the camera to your advantage will assist you in 


heated battles with multiple targets. 


When moving about an area, sometimes an exclamation 
mark (!) will appear over your character’s head. This is 
called an “action icon.” When this icon appears, it is an 
indicator that something important such as a door, switch, 
or treasure is nearby. When you approach the object, the 
action icon will change. Press the @ or @ button to 
interact with the object. 


You can only speak with NPCs who have a talk icon above 
their heads. To begin a conversation, approach an NPC 
and press either the @ or ® button. 


When a @ appears in the log window, you can press the @ 
button to review previous pages of text. Use the @ and @ 
buttons or the up/down directional buttons to change 


pages. 


VIEWING MAPS 


There are three types of maps: the Minimap, the Location Map, and the World Map. 


MINIMAP 

This small map appears in the upper right-hand corner of 
the screen and gives a simplified view of the immediate 
area surrounding your character. 

* Reading the Minimap 


Your current position. The red arrow points in the direction you 
are facing. The green cone indicates the direction of the camera. 


BLUE DOTS RED DOTS GREEN DOTS 
Party members Foes NPCs you can speak with 


LOCATION MAP 

Whether traveling through an area or engaging in battle, pressing the SELECT button will call 
up the Location Map. The Location Map shows each zone within an area, as well as 
connections between zones, important locations such as shops, and occasionally your 
destination. 


Location Maps can be purchased from Cartographers’ Guild vendors or found inside ornate urns. 


¢ Reading the Location Map 


CURRENT POSITION: The flashing [@>] indicates your current position. Zones that you have traveled through will appear 
light gray, while zones you have yet to explore will be a darker gray. If you have not found or purchased a Location Map, only 
places that you have walked through will be displayed. 


AREA INFORMATION: Various icons on the map convey information about the selected area. Use the directional buttons to 
select different zones, and press the @ button to bring up a list of important locations within that zone. When an item in the 
list is selected, the corresponding icon on the Location Map will flash. 


ZOOM: Press the MBM or button to zoom in and out. 


The lines between zones on Location Maps represent the connections from one zone to another. These 
connections appear as dotted blue lines as you move through an area. 


* World Map 

Selecting “World Map” from the Party Menu will open a map of Ivalice. From this map you can 
confirm the locations of areas you have already visited or for which you have obtained maps. Select 
an area using the directional buttons and press the @ button to view its Location Map. 


TRAVELING THE WORLD 


There are several ways to make your way around Ivalice: 


AFOOT 


Compared to other types of transportation, this one will require the most time. However, if 
your goal is gathering information or collecting treasure, walking through an area will reap the 
most rewards, especially if it is your first time there. 


CHOCOBOS 


In several villages and towns across Ivalice you will find 
chocobo stables where, for a small fee, you can hire a 
chocobo for riding. Controlling a chocobo is similar to 
traveling afoot, though there are a few differences. A 
chocobo’s speed is significantly higher than that of a 
character afoot, and you will not be attacked by monsters 
while riding. However, you will only be allowed to ride a 
chocobo for a limited amount of time. When that time 
runs out, you will automatically dismount. After dismounting, nearby monsters may attack, so 
it is recommended that you keep an eye on the clock in the lower right of the screen when 
riding through dangerous areas. 

Also, you can dismount at any time by pressing the © button. Note that once you have 
dismounted, you will not be able to remount, regardless of how much riding time remained 
prior to dismounting. 


¢ Sprinting 
Pressing @ while riding a chocobo will give you an added boost of speed for a limited time. 
You can sprint up to three times. 


In addition to hiring from the stables, there are other methods of obtaining a chocobo. However you 


come by one, you would do well to give these charming yellow birds a try as it is rumored that there 
are places only accessible to chocobos. 


AIRSHIPS 
As the story progresses, you will have the opportunity to make use of the airships that connect 
various cities and towns across Ivalice. Not only are airships among the fastest methods of 

transportation, they also offer many other services as well, such as onboard shopping. 


Located in towns, fields, and dungeons across Ivalice are 
large blue crystals known as “save crystals.” Pressing the @ 
button when near one will fully restore all party members’ 
HP and MP, remove harmful status ailments and revive 
any characters who have been KO'd. You will also be given 
the opportunity to save your game. By selecting “Save” you 
will be taken to the save screen. After selecting the 
appropriate MEMORY CARD slot, select the save file to which you wish to write your data. 


It is highly recommended you take care when overwriting save data. There will be instances where you 
will not be able to leave an area until completing a certain task. If you are not sure that your party can 
accomplish that task at their current levels or with the equipment they possess, it may be wise to save 


to a new file before entering the area rather than overwriting previous data. 


During your travels you will often come across large orange 
crystals known as “gate crystals.” If you possess a “teleport 
stone” you can use it to instantly teleport to any other gate 
crystal you have touched in the past. Each teleportation will 
consume one teleport stone. 

As with save crystals, gate crystals can also be used for 
saving your game and healing your party. 


In addition to the methods listed above, there are also other modes of transportation unique to certain 


areas. Locating these will assist you on your journey 


15 


oe 
=) 


THE PARTY MENU 


Pressing the ® button while adventuring or in battle will 
call up the Party Menu. Many different tasks can be 
performed within this menu, such as viewing your 
characters’ stats, equipping weapons and armor, and 
adjusting game settings. 


Use this command to add and remoye members from your 
current party. After selecting a character, use the @ button 
or the left/right directional buttons to add or remove him 
from the party. Characters whose pictures are highlighted 
and offset to the left are members of the active party. A 
party can include up to three active members. The 
remaining reserve members can be called to action at any 


time using the Party command. 

Note that while attempting to adjust party composition during battle, members who are 
targeted or performing an action cannot be removed from the party until they are no longer 
targeted or the corresponding action is complete. 


As you proceed through the game, there will be times when other characters temporarily join 
your party. While these “guests” are considered party members, they will act according to their 
own will. Guest members do not gain experience, cannot be given orders, cannot be removed 
from the party, and cannot have their equipment adjusted. 


Use this option to view the current stats and status effects 
of your characters. Press the or 8 buttons to cycle 
through characters. 


LEVEL | The character's current level. 


HP | The character's current/maximum hit points. If a character’s HP reaches zero, the player is KO'd 
| and unable to participate in battle. Max HP increases as a character gains levels or obtains certain 
licenses. 


The character's current/maximum Mist points. Mist points are required to cast spells. Max MP 
increases as a character gains levels. 


The number of license points a character currently has to spend on acquiring new licenses. 
Defeat foes to earn LP. 


The character's current number of experience points and the number of points needed to reach 
the next level. Defeat foes to earn EXP. 


EXP/NEXT 


‘ 3 { 
Attack Power | The character's attack power. The higher the number, the more physical damage the character is 


capable of dealing to an enemy. Attack power is based mainly on a character's weapon. 


Defense The character's defense rating. The higher the number, the less damage the character will take 
from physical attacks. Defense is based mainly on a character's armor. 


Magick Resist The character's resistance to magick. The higher the number, the less damage the character will 
take from magick-based attacks. Magick resist is based mainly on a character's helm. 


‘The character's ability to evade physical attacks. The higher the number, the higher the 
probability an enemy’s attack will miss or the character will successfully parry or block. Evade is 
ed mainly on a character's shield. 


“Magick Evade | "The character's ability to evade magick. The higher the number, the higher the probability an 
enemy's magick will not be effective on the character. Magick evade is based mainly on a 
| character's shield. 


Strength Determines the power of most physical attacks. Strength increases as a character gains levels or 
obtains certain licenses. 


Magick Power Determines the potency of various magicks. Magick power inéreases asa character gains levels or 
obtains certain licenses. Magick power also affects the attack power of some weapons. 


Vitality Determines the character's resistance to various status ailments as well as the time required for 
recovery. Vitality increases as a character gains levels. 


Speed | Determines the amount of time required to perform various actions. Speed also affeets the attack 


| power of some weapons. 


There are some weapons, armor, and accessories that affect the above attributes when equipped. 


Character development in FINAL FANTASY XII is based largely on the acquisition of “licenses.” 
Licenses are required to equip weapons and armor, learn magicks and technicks, and enhance a 
character's abilities. For a detailed description of the license system, please refer to page 20. 


EQUIP 
Use this command to change the equipment of your party members. 

You can manually remove or equip each character's weapon, off-hand item, helm, armor, and 
accessory, or choose “optimize” to automatically equip a character with the strongest 
equipment available. 

To equip items manually, first select “Equip” from the menu. Next, select the type of item 
you wish to equip. When selecting weapons, you can cycle through weapon categories using 
the left/right directional buttons or the 58/t=m buttons. 

When a piece of equipment in the item list is highlighted, the item’s effect on a character's 
attributes is displayed. A number in red indicates that the equipment will lower an attribute, 
while a number in blue indicates an increase. 

Equipment listed in gray is either currently equipped by another character or cannot be 
equipped due to a lack of the proper license. View the chart on the far right of the screen to 
determine whether or not a character has acquired the license necessary to equip a certain item. 


Reading the Equip Screen 

Character whose equipment you have chosen to change 
Character’s current equipment 

Change in attributes caused by equipping the selected item 
List of items in your party’s inventory 

Chart indicating which characters can equip the selected item 


URwWNne 


Weapon Equip one-handed, two-handed, and ranged weapons in this slot 


Off-hand | Equip shields (when a one-handed weapon is equipped) or ammunition (when a ranged weapon 


is equipped) in this slot 


Helm Equip headgear to increase magick resist in this slot 


Armor Equip armor to increase defense in this slot 


Accessory | Equip accessories with various effects in this slot 


Weapons and armor are divided into a number of different categories, each having unique stats and 
attributes. Use LP to acquire licenses that best suit a character's strengths and weaknesses. 


* Action List 

When selecting a character in the Party Menu, pressing the @ button calls up that character's 
action list. The action list displays the magicks, technicks, Espers, and quickenings the 
character has obtained. Magicks, etc., listed in gray have yet to be learned. Press the @ or @ 
button to advance through the list. Use the directional buttons to select and display a short 
summary of each action. 


LICENSES 
Use this command to spend license points and obtain new licenses. Character development in 
FINAL FANTASY XII is based largely on the acquisition of “licenses.” Licenses are required to 


equip weapons and armor, learn magicks and technicks, and enhance a character's abilities. 


License points (LP) are earned along with experience points when you defeat an enemy. Refer to page 


22 on how to use LP to obtain licenses. 


GAMBITS 

Use this command to configure a character’s gambits. Gambits are customizable commands 
that determine how a character will fight during battle. For more information on customizing 
and configuring gambits, please refer to page 24. 


WORLD MAP 


Use this command to view the World Map, as well as any Location Maps you possess. 


INVENTORY 


Use this command to view the items you have obtained. 


CLAN PRIMER 

Use this option to view the Clan Primer, a comprehensive adventuring guide used by adventurers 
across Ivalice. Useful information such as hunt records, traveler's tips, and more can be found 
within its pages. You will obtain the Clan Primer after completing a certain task. Once you have 
received it, it is recommended that you check it often for hints on a variety of subjects. 


CONFIG 


Use this command to adjust various battle and game settings. 


When lists such as the weapons list contain too many items to display on one screen, you can use the @ 
button in conjunction with the up/down directional buttons to quickly advance through the pages. 


LICENSES 


Character development in FINAL FANTASY XII is based largely on the acquisition of 


“licenses.” Licenses are required to equip weapons and armor, learn magicks and technicks, and 


enhance a character's abilities. 


miaE BASICS 


In addition to enabling a character to equip various items or cast potent magicks, there are also 
licenses to boost maximum HP or increase a character's number of gambits. Licenses can be 
obtained on the “license board” by using “license points” (LP) earned when defeating foes. 
Each character has a license board; however, the layout of the board is the same for all 
characters. 

Simply obtaining a license for a magick or technick does not automatically allow a character 
to use that ability. Before it can be used, the corresponding magick or technick must be 
purchased or found. Once you have acquired a magick or technick, any of your characters with 
the proper license will be able to use it. 

Licenses for ability enhancements do not require any items and are effective immediately after 
being obtained. 


You are free to choose which licenses each character acquires. There are several categories of 
licenses, and using LP to obtain them will gradually open up new licenses on the same area of 
the board. These newly unlocked licenses will often be more powerful than previous ones and 
thus require more LP to acquire. To ensure smooth adventuring, you should focus character 
license acquisition on the areas in which you wish them to excel. 


The license board is loosely divided 
into six different areas: 

1 Magicks 

2 Accessories 

3 Augments 

4 Technicks 

5 Armor 

6 Weapons 

If you wish to make a character skilled 
in magick, it would be wise to allot 
most points to licenses in category 1. 
On the other hand, if you prefer a 
character who excels in physical 
attacks, it would be better to focus on 
obtaining licenses in category 6. 


NN SSSSSSEeEeEeEeEeEee—u0<0Q0u0Quu5QQqqQqqQqQnQn  —————_—_————————————ee 


THE LICENSE BOARD 
The license board can be displayed by selecting “Licenses” 


from the Party Menu and choosing a character. 
1 Character name/available LP 

2 License description 

3 Licenses already obtained 

4 Available licenses 

5 Locked licenses 


¢ License Board 

The layout of the board is the same for all characters. 

* Available LP 

The current amount of LP the character has to spend on new licenses. 


* License Description 
A description of the currently selected license. 


* Licenses Already Obtained 

Licenses already obtained by a character are displayed in color. 

* Available Licenses 

Licenses that have yet to be obtained by a character are displayed in light gray. The number in 
the lower left-hand corner of an available license is the amount of LP required to obtain it. 

¢ Locked Licenses 


Detailed information regarding locked licenses remains hidden until an adjacent license has 
been obtained. 


You can press the or MB buttons at any time to cycle through the license boards of each character. 


OBTAINING LICENSES 


1. Open the board of the character for whom you wish to obtain licenses. Use the and 
buttons to cycle through your party members. 


2. On the board you can see which licenses the selected 
character has obtained so far. Use the directional buttons 
to select a license. A * mark in the license panel 
description indicates that it has already been obtained. 
Gray text indicates magicks, technicks, armor, weapons, 
etc. that have yet to be acquired. 


3. Only those licenses adjacent to previously obtained licenses can be viewed and obtained. The 
number in the bottom left hand corner of each indicates the amount of LP required to obtain 
it. Select one of these licenses to view a detailed description. 


4. Locked licenses cannot be obtained, regardless of how many LP a character may have. 
Selecting one will display the LP cost and the category of the license. 


5. Obtaining a new license will unlock those adjacent to it. 
The more licenses unlocked in one direction, the more 
powerful the licenses will become. To learn potent magicks 
or equip powerful weapons, you typically must learn lesser 
licenses first. 


The licenses you choose for your characters will directly affect their performance on the battlefield. 
Raising balanced characters is one path you may wish to take; however, raising six characters with 


individual strengths may make your adventuring easier. For example, why not create a paladin-type 


character who excels in swordsmanship as well as healing magic? Or how about a black mage, excelling 
at damage dealing, or a white mage specializing in mending your party's wounds? The possibilities are 
endless. Oftentimes, a balanced party of unique individuals can be much more effective than a party 


of average ones. 


ESPERS AND QUICKENINGS 


— a 


In addition to normal licenses, the board also hides licenses for Espers and special attacks 
known as “quickenings.” 

Licenses for summoning Espers only appear on the license board after your party has 
defeated one. As with normal licenses, Esper licenses require LP to obtain; however, be aware 
that each Esper can only be obtained and summoned by a single character. 

Quickenings are special attacks unique to each character in your party. Quickening licenses 
are hidden about the board and only appear when a nearby license has been obtained. The 
locations of all the quickening licenses are the same on all license boards, however, when a 
character learns a quickening, that license will be removed from all other characters’ boards. 


MIST 


When a character obtains an Esper or quickening license, the option “Mist” will be added to 
the Battle Menu. By using “Mist Charges,” the character will be able to summon Espers or 
perform quickenings, special attacks capable of dealing considerable damage to your foes. 


¢ Mist Charges 

When a new Esper or quickening is obtained, a new MP gauge will be combined with the 
original one. This new gauge will possess the same maximum MP limit as the original. A 
character may obtain up to three of these gauges, called “Mist Charges.” Mist Charges are 
required when summoning an Esper or performing quickenings, with the number of Mist 
Charges required depending on the selected Esper or quickening’s rank. Using a Mist Charge 
spends all the MP within a gauge. 


* Mist Chains 

When a quickening is performed, the screen switches to 
quickening mode. While these attacks can be performed 
alone, chaining several together presents an opportunity to 
deal massive damage to a target. 

At the bottom of the quickening mode screen, a timer 
and a list of available quickenings is displayed. By pressing 
the proper button combinations within the allotted time, 
you will be able to perform multiple attacks. The quicker you are able to input the combinations, 
the more time you will have left to perform the next. When the timer runs out, your Mist chain 
will end. 

Pressing the button while in the quickening mode screen shuffles the quickening list. At 
times, a “charge” option will appear. Selecting this refills a Mist Charge, allowing continued use 
of quickenings. 


GAMBITS 


Gambits are customizable commands that can direct characters to automatically perform 
certain tasks during battle or while adventuring. 


THE BASICS 

Gambits consist of two different components, one being the “target” which represents the 
character/foe an action will be carried out on, and the other being the “action” to be performed ' 
on the selected target. Both must be assigned a condition before the gambit can be activated. 

Assignable targets consist of party members and foes, as well as various specialized cases, for 
example “Ally: MP < 40%,” which targets allies with less than 40% of their maximum MP. 
These targets must be either purchased at a gambit shop or found in treasure chests. Once you 
have obtained a target, your whole party will be able to use it. 

Assignable actions consist of commands such as Attack, Magicks, Technicks, and Items. 
With the exception of Attack, your party must have obtained a magick, item, etc. before you 
will be allowed to assign it as an action. An action will appear in each character's gambit action 
list the moment it is obtained. However, it will remain unusable (in gray) until the character 
has obtained the corresponding license. 

You can increase a character's number of gambit slots by obtaining new ones from the 
license board. 


There is no one way to configure your gambits. You should always build gambits that best suit the 
current situation. You can also turn ON/OFF each character’s gambits at any time. Sometimes it is 
wiser to turn off all gambits during a heated battle to prevent unnecessary actions that may be 

detrimental to your chances of victory. 


( 
—>~—>~—~-~>Z>ZZ= = a - Scene aeons 


GAMBIT CONFIGURATION 
Select “Gambits” from the Party Menu and select a character to open the gambit configuration 
screen. 


¢ Reading the Gambit Configuration Screen 
1 Selected character 

2 ON/OFF switch 

3 Target 

4 Action 

5 Gambit slot 


* ON/OFF Switch 
Switches all gambits ON/OFE When switched ON, the character will automatically perform 
the assigned actions when the target conditions are met. 


Even when gambits are switched ON, predefined actions can be overridden by manual commands 
from the Battle Menu. Gambits can also be switched ON/OFF directly from the Battle Menu. 


* Target 
Assigns a target such as a party member or a foe. Gambit targets must be purchased or found. 


* Action 
Assigns an action to be performed on a selected target. If a character has not obtained the 
corresponding license, the action will be displayed in gray. 


¢ Gambit Slot 

A gray slot indicates a gambit that has been switched OFF, or has not been assigned a target 
and action. A blue slot indicates an action that involves an ally, while a red slot indicates an 
action that involves a foe. 


1. First, select a target from the categorized list that 
appears on the left. 


2. There are many categories to choose from, some 
catering to fairly specific situations. These consist of party- 
specific (e.g. Ally: Penelo), HP/MP-specific (e.g. Ally: MP 
< 70%), and status-specific (e.g. Ally: status = Slow) 
targets, in addition to many others. Adjusting targets to 
match the strengths and weaknesses of allies and foes will greatly benefit you on the battlefield. 


3. After assigning a target, your next task will be to select the action to be performed on the 
target. Actions consist of commands like Attack and license-based abilities such as magicks and 
technicks. You can also assign the use of items in your inventory. 


4. Chosen magicks and technicks will be performed according to the targets you have assigned. 
The same is true for items. However, such actions will only be initiated if you have the 
necessary MP or appropriate item in your inventory. 


5. By highlighting a gambit and pressing the @ button 
once, you can adjust its position in the list with the up or 
down directional buttons. Press @ again to confirm its new 
position. A gambit’s position in the list determines its 
priority. 

6. Gambits will activate in the order of their listed priority. 
As long as the conditions for a higher priority gambit are 
met, any gambits of lower priority will not be activated. If 
priority rankings are not set properly, certain gambits may 
never activate. If you run into problems with gambits, try adjusting their priority. 


7. You can turn a gambit ON/OFF by selecting it and pressing the @ button twice. When 
OFF, the gambit will be displayed in dark gray. Turn off individual gambits when you feel their 
effects may be detrimental to a battle’s progress. Turn off all gambits when you wish to proceed 
without engaging in any battles at all. 

Remember that gambit actions can be overridden at any time by issuing a command from 
the Battle Menu. 


SAMPLE GAMBITS 


Gambits can be used to speed up or improve the efficiency of battles, as well as give you an advantage 
in heated situations. Below are a few examples of gambits that may help you in your adventures: 


Along with targets for individual characters or enemies, 
there are also specialized targets for certain situations. 
Using the target best suited to your current situation will 
ensure maximum effectiveness. 

The gambit above will cause the character to cast Cure 
on any party member whose HP has fallen below 70% of its 
maximum. The character will not carry out this command unless the conditions are met, 
allowing you to concentrate on other aspects of the battle without worrying about everyone's HP. 

In addition to HP-related targets, there are also MP-related and status-related ones, as well 
as targets that exploit foes’ weaknesses (e.g. Foe: earth-vulnerable). 


| GREENE Co. 17)" 1000 Needles mmm) 

In addition to Attack and Magicks, Technicks and Items 
can also be set as actions. By combining proper actions and 
targets, you can build gambits that will make the best use 
of your items and MP, or deal the most damage to your 
foes. The example above will initiate the ranged technick, 
“1000 Needles,” when the character is confronted by a 


flying enemy (an enemy that cannot be attacked with melee weapons). Preparing gambits for 
several situations can help increase the overall pace of the game while maximizing an individual 
character's potential. 


The order of gambits in the gambit list also represents their priority. A character will never 
execute a gambit lower in the list as long as the conditions for a higher one are met. Likewise, 
if conditions for a gambit high on the list are not met, the next gambit down is given priority. 
The example above has the character attacking the same target as the party leader, and then 
casting Cure on an ally with less than 40% HP. However, as long as the leader has a target, the 
character will never cast the spell. In this case, the character will only cast Cure when the 
leader's target has been defeated. To ensure that the character casts Cure during a battle, you 
would have to move the Cure gambit above the Attack gambit. 


BATTLE 


FINAL FANTASY XII is proud to introduce the revolutionary Active Dimension Battle (ADB) 
system, combining the ease of turn-based RPGs with the excitement of real-time action. 


THE BASICS 
* Active Dimension Battle 
The ADB system removes the transition between exploration and battle. No longer are battles 
fought in a closed environment. Now, whole areas are your battlefields. Terrain, party member 
location, and obstacles all influence how a battle is fought. Also, because you can see foes 
before engaging them, you have the opportunity to avoid unwanted conflicts. 

Each type of monster has its own territory and behavioral patterns. Some foes will attack 
your party the moment they spot you, others will leave you alone unless provoked, while still 
others fight among themselves or prey on weaker monsters. 


* Battle Commands & Gambits 
When a battle begins, simply selecting the Attack command once for each character will order 
them to engage the specified target and continue fighting until the target has been defeated. It 
is not necessary to reselect the command after every hit. If you have gambits activated, your 
characters will automatically carry out those commands. 

Remember that even if gambits are activated, those orders can be overridden at any time by 
issuing a command from the Battle Menu. Also, all of an ally’s gambits can be switched 
ON/OFF from the same menu. 


* Battle Modes 
There are two battle modes available in FINAL FANTASY XII: Wait and Active. In Wait 
mode, the action is paused whenever the Battle Menu is open, allowing you to organize your 
strategies without having to worry about an enemy’s relentless attacks. In Active mode, the 
action continues regardless of whether or not the Battle Menu is open. This mode is 
recommended for skilled players who seek thrilling, fast-paced confrontations. 

The battle mode can be changed at any time from the Config screen found within the Party 
Menu. 


Paying attention not only to a monster's attributes, but also to the terrain on which you fight, will 
help ensure victory when fighting powerful foes. The battlefield is always changing, and it is wise to 
adjust your gambits and strategy to meet the demands of the situation. 


READING THE BATTLE SCREEN 


1 Help message 

2 Combat log/target info 

3 Target line 

4 HP gauge 

5 Target guide 

6 Battle Menu 

7 Charge time gauge 

8 Gambit status 

9 Current/max HP Current MP 


¢ Help Message 
Information about the currently selected command. 


¢ Combat Log/Target Info 
Information about actions performed by allies and foes. When a foe is targeted, various 
information such as the target's name is displayed. 


¢ Target Line 
A line connecting a target with an ally or foe who is currently performing an action on that 
target. The color of the line varies with target and action type. 


* HP Gauge 
A simplified HP gauge showing a target’s current hit points. The color of the gauge varies with 
the type of target. 


¢ Target Guide 

An arrow extending from the party leader indicating whether or not a target is within range. A 
yellow arrow indicates the character is within range to perform the selected action. A red arrow 
means that the character is too far from the target. 


° Battle Menu 

A list of battle commands called up by pressing the @ button. Select a command with the 
up/down directional buttons. Toggle between allies with the left/right directional buttons. An 
ally’s gambits can also be turned ON/OFF from this window. 

¢ Charge Time Gauge 

A gauge indicating how much time remains before a character will perform an action. 


¢ Gambit Status 
A stylized “G” is displayed when a character's gambits are turned ON. 


¢ Current/Max HP Current MP 

Current HP is displayed on the left, maximum on the right. Next to these numbers, the 
character's current (but not maximum) MP is also shown. Open the Party Menu to view the 
character's maximum MP. 


Foes with a red HP gauge are aggressive and will attack your 
party if they spot you. If possible, it is wise to check a target 
before engaging in battle. If you use the technick “Libra” or 
have an accessory with the Libra effect equipped, you will be 
able to view target information such as HP and level in the 
upper left-hand corner of the screen. 

Enemies with a green HP gauge will not attack your party 
unless you attack first. However, the gauges of certain enemies have been known to change 
from green to red, even without violent provocation. 


Pressing the & or @ button will call up the Battle Menu. Here you can choose commands such 
as Attack or Magicks & Technicks to perform on selected targets. Use the left/right directional 
buttons to toggle between party members. 

Characters who have their gambits turned ON will automatically carry out the actions assigned 
to them by their gambits without waiting for a battle command. 


After selecting an action, a window will appear in the 
lower left-hand corner of the screen listing all nearby 
targets. At this point, a red ring will appear around the 
target currently selected from the list. When performing an 
action on party members, such as casting Cure, a blue ring 
will appear around the selected target. When a target has 
been selected, pressing the & button will initiate the 
action. 


When allies or enemies initiate actions, colored lines will 
appear, connecting them to their targets. These are known 
as “target lines.” Red target lines indicate enemy actions 
against allies. Blue lines indicate allies’ actions against 
enemies. Green lines indicate healing actions such as 
casting Cure or using potions. 


After selecting an action, the “charge time gauge” displayed to the left of a character's name will 
begin to fill. When the gauge is completely filled, the character will execute the action. Once 
Attack has been selected, a character will continue to automatically attack the target with his 


equipped weapon until the target has been defeated. There is no need to re-input the Attack 
command when the charge time gauge resets. If gambits are turned ON, a character will 
continue to execute the set commands as long as the gambit conditions are met. 


6. Other Actions During Battle 

Gambits can be overridden at any time by inputting commands from the Battle Menu. All of 
an ally’s gambits can also be switched OFF from the same menu. However, please note that if 
the party leader is positioned too far away from other allies, tasks such as leader changes or 
battle command input may not be executable. 


PARTY COMPOSITION 

| You can instantaneously change your party leader at any time by pressing the up/down directional 
buttons when the Battle Menu is not open. In the event your party leader is KO’d, gameplay will stop 
and you will be required to select a new leader before proceeding. If you have more than three 
characters available, you can call up reserve members using the Party command in the Party Menu. 


* Fleeing 

If you wish to cancel all commands and flee from battle or simply avoid confrontation with 
aggressive targets, pressing and holding down the tg button will cancel all current ally actions 
and prevent the execution of any further actions (including gambits) until the button is released. 


Most foes only move and act within a limited area, their “territory.” A foe will often chase you if you 
choose to flee battle; however, many give up when they reach a certain distance from their original 


positions. 
Please note that while it is easier to avoid attacks while fleeing, you will still be vulnerable to them. 
Also, be careful when running, as you may stumble across other aggressive monsters in your path. 


7. End of Battle 

When all nearby targets have been defeated, the battle will conclude and the EXP/LP amount 
earned will appear above the fallen enemy. On occasion, enemies will drop items. Move your 
character over the item icon to pick it up and place it into your inventory. 


* Battle Chains 

Defeating the same type of foe in succession results in a “battle chain.” The current chain 
count is briefly displayed in the lower right-hand corner of the screen immediately after you 
defeat a foe, and continues to rise until you defeat a different type of foe, enter a town, or 
touch a save or gate crystal. The higher the battle chain, the better chance your party will have 
of obtaining items after defeating a foe. In addition, there are several levels of battle chain, with 
higher levels improving drop rates, and increasing the chances of finding rare items, as well as 
adding beneficial effects, such as Cure, to the items when you pick them up. 


LPS 


Below are a few pieces of advice to help you along on your adventure: 


USE LIBRA! 
Obtainable on the license board, Libra is a technick that allows you to not only see the name 
of a foe when targeting it, but also its HP/max HP, level, and weaknesses. It also reveals the 
location of hidden traps. There are several different types of traps in dungeons and fields 
around Ivalice, most of which have detrimental effects. Libra is quite useful when trying to 
avoid these obstacles. 

In addition to the technick, there are also accessories that give players the Libra status effect 
when equipped. 


CHECK NAME COLOR! 

When none of your party members have Libra activated, you can still make an estimate of a 
target’s strength by viewing the color of its name in the information window. 

Blue An easy target 


Yellow A tough target, but not impossible to defeat 
Red An incredibly tough target, far beyond your party’s current level 
SELL YOUR LOOT! 


Most monsters do not carry gil, so to earn money you must often sell items that you find 
during your travels. The majority of the loot that you find on foes cannot be used by your 
party, so after confirming that you do not require an item, sell it to one of the many 
shopkeepers peddling their wares across Ivalice. 

Sometimes, after selling loot to a shop, new bazaar goods will become available for purchase. 
The contents of most bazaar goods remain a mystery until they are obtained, so there is some 
tisk involved when buying. However, it is rumored that there are some rare objects that can 
only be obtained from the bazaar... 


CONSIDER EQUIPMENT BONUSES! 

Many weapon and armor categories confer unique bonuses. For example, each category of 
weapon has a different attack range and some categories allow for a higher percentage of 
multiple attacks or higher parry rate. Armor, on the other hand, often offers various stat boosts 
and added effects. For example, certain equipment from the Mystic Armor category boosts 
magick-related attributes such as magick power or maximum MP. It is always wise to consider 
the strengths of a character when deciding which equipment and weapon licenses to obtain. 


LEARN ACTION RANGES! 

As mentioned earlier, a weapon's attack range is determined by its category. While melee 
weapons such as daggers and swords have limited range, ranged weapons such as crossbows and 
guns can deal damage to distant or flying enemies. Only ranged weapons, magicks, and select 
technicks can be used to defeat these foes. Note that magicks and technicks also have varying 
ranges of effectiveness. 

You can determine whether or not your party leader is close enough to a target to perform 
the desired action by checking the color of the target guide (arrow) stretching in front of him. 
If the arrow is yellow, the target is within range; if it is red, it is not. All other party members, 
regardless of active gambits, will automatically move within range of their targets. 


KEEP AN EYE ON YOUR STATUS! 
Foes often possess attacks that cause harmful status effects. If left untreated, these effects could 
hamper a character's performance, or even knock one out of a battle. 


AILMENT | DESCRIPTION TREATMENT 


t — 4 — 
Oil | Increases damage dealt by Fire magicks * Handkerchief 


Disease Prevents recovery of HP * Vaccine 


Poison Deadly toxin gradually deals damage over time * Antidote 


| Gradually drains HP Regen 


| Prevents all movement or action | * Chronos Tear 


| Prevents movement | © Remedy* 


T 


ee) Es 
| Prevents action * Remedy* 


Se a.. * 


Stone/Petri fy 


Turns a character to stone when the count reaches 0 | * Gold Needle 


a eS) Ss ee > gas bana 
Automatically KO’s a character when the count reaches 0 * Remedy* 
| 


2 . = _ 
Prevents movement or action | * Alarm Clock 


The character cannot tell friend from foe and cannot take commands | * Smelling Salts 
PESOTE Os 0H rats A = ee a 
Lowers weapon accuracy | « Eye Drops 


| Prevents magick use ’ ~~ |* Echo Herbs 


Increases the amount of time needed to execute actions * Haste 


*The healing properties of remedies can be improved by obtaining special licenses. 
**In addition to items, there are also magicks that remove some of the above status effects. 


EXPLORING RABANASTRE 


The following is information about Rabanastre, the town in which you begin your adventure. 


The locations below can all be found on your Location Map by pressing the SELECT button. 


RABANASTRE SHOPPING GUIDE 

The Sandsea 

Located in Rabanastre’s bustling East End, the Sandsea has quenched parched throats and filled 
empty bellies for generations, earning itself a place in the heart of many a weary traveler. 
Adventurers from throughout Dalmasca journey here to view the notice board, where bills for 
the hunting of monsters, called “marks,” are posted. 


Panamis’s Protectives 

From thick metal armor that protects its wearers from the most powerful blows, to enchanted 
robes woven with mystical linens said to enhance a wearer’s bond with the arcane, Panamis’s 
Protectives guarantees the best selection of armor in the region. Stop by and check out their 
magick-resistant helms, gilt breastplates, and sturdy shields. 


Amal’s Weaponry 

Stocking a wide variety of weapons for novice and master alike, Amal’s Weaponry has a little 
something for everyone. To new adventurers, Amal recommends his selection of simple swords 
and daggers. To those who wish to keep their distance from the heat of battle, he suggests one 
of his fine ranged weapons. He even carries a few unique rods and staves for those who prefer 
something off the beaten path. 


Migelo’s Sundries 

A successful adventurer is one who is prepared for anything, and prepared you will be after 
browsing through the extensive list of Migelo’s wares. So whether you are a seasoned traveler or 
a fledgling newly flown, stop by Migelo’s Sundries before setting off into the wild. 


Batahn’s Technicks 

Do you find yourself constantly running out of MP in the middle of battles? Are you tired of 
bland, ordinary magicks? Then Batahn may have what you're looking for! Technicks are quick 
and easy to use, require no MP, and are, most of all, unique. Once you have saved up enough 
license points, stop by Batahn’s and see if he can accommodate your needs. 


Yugri’s Magicks 

MP gradually accumulate inside one’s body through absorption of faint traces of Mist 
occurring naturally in the air. Don't let it go to waste! Powerful curative magicks to heal your 
companion’s wounds, time magick capable of manipulating the flow of battle, deadly arcane 
magic to deal untold damage to your enemies — Yugri’s stocks only the finest in tomes. 


Yamoora’s Gambits 


Would you like to improve the efficiency of your party members’ actions during battle? Then 
hurry over to Yamoora’s Gambits and pick up a few specialized targets. Be sure to stop by when 
your travels bring you back to Rabanastre, as they are always updating their selection of 
reasonably priced merchandise. 


YOUR CLAN 

During your adventures, you will obtain a special item called a Clan Primer. This handy guide 
grants admission to the Clan Hall of Clan Centurio, allowing you access to prime information 
on hunts all across Ivalice. 


What are Hunts? 

In many towns and villages, you will happen upon large notice boards displaying “bills” 
requesting the capture, extermination, or exorcising of certain terrible beasts. After contacting 
the petitioners who post these bills, off you go on the hunt! If successful, they will often reward 
you with gil, weapons, armor, or other loot. 


Clan Centurio 

It is said that over one hundred clans exist across Ivalice. One of those operating out of 
Rabanastre is Clan Centurio, led by the eccentric moogle, Montblanc. You can visit the Clan 
Hall to learn of rare hunts available only to clan members, as well as obtain information on 
your clan rank and hunts you have accepted. 


Clan Rank 

Your rank within Clan Centurio rises as you defeat foes on your adyentures and successfully 
complete hunts. When you achieve a new rank, you will be presented with a gift from the clan 
leader and be granted access to new items in the exclusive clan shop located in the Muthru 
Bazaar. 


Clan Primer 

The Clan Primer is a comprehensive record of your travels in Ivalice. It contains information 
on your accomplishments within the clan, as well as important information on hunts that you 
have accepted. It also contains a bestiary of foes you have defeated, and various adventuring 
hints. 


CREDITS 


Directors 
Hiroshi Minagawa 
Hiroyuki Ito (Game Design) 


MAIN SYSTEM & EVENT PROGRAMMER DIRECTOR 
(NORTH AMERICAN VERSION) 
Takashi Katano 


LEAD REALTIME RENDERING PROGRAMMER 
Yoshinori Tsuchida 


PROGRAMMING SUPERVISOR 
Taku Murata 


MAIN CHARACTER DESIGN & BACKGROUND DESIGN SUPERVISOR 
Akihiko Yoshida 


ART DIRECTION 
Hideo Minaba 
Isamu Kamikokuryo 


VISUAL DESIGN & CHARACTER TEXTURE SUPERVISOR 
Hiroshi Minagawa 


Visual EFrects DiRECcTOR 
Jiro Mifune 


BACKGROUND VISUAL EFFects 
Yoshinori Ogura 


LEAD MOTION DESIGNER 
Takeo Suzuki 


EVENT MOTION DESIGNER 
Hiroaki Saotome 


HI-POLYGON FaciaL Mopets & TEXTURES 
Takahiro Matsuhira 


HI-POLYGON Factat MOTION 
Takeshi Sadohara 


BATTLE System DESIGN 
Kazutoyo Maehiro 


Event Direction 
Jun Akiyama 


SCENARIO 
Daisuke Watanabe 
Miwa Shoda 


Lead IN-GAME EVENT DesiGNeR 
Takeshi Iwabuchi 
Masahiro Kataoka 


LEAD Map SYSTEM DESIGNER 
Kazuhiro Kataoka 


LEAD MENU SysTEM DESIGNER 
Yuichi Murasawa 


SOUND ErFects Direcror 
Tomohiro Yajima 


Movie DIRECTION 
Eiji Fujii 

IMAGE ILLUSTRATION 
Yoshitaka Amano 


Music PRODUCTION & COMPOSITION 
Hitoshi Sakimoto 


Story & CONCEPT 
Yasumi Matsuno 


CAST 


VAAN 
Bobby Edner 


PENELO 
Cat Taber 


BALTHIER 
Gideon Emery 


FRAN 
Nicole Fan 


ASHE 
Kari Wahlgren 


BAscu 
Keith Ferguson 


VAYNE 
Elijah Alexander 
Johnny McKeown 


GABRANTH 
Michael Rodgers 


cip 
John Lee 


Au-Cip 
David Rasner 


Reppas 
Phil LaMarr 


ONDORE 
Tom Kane 


VOSSLER 
Nolan North 


RASLER 
Andrew Philpot 


REks 
Yuri Lowenthal 


EMPEROR GRAMIS 
Roger L. Jackson 


Guis 
Mark Wing-Davey 


BERGAN 
Gary Martin 


Dace 
Julia Fletcher 


‘ZARGABAATH 
Simon Templeman 
Jore 

Michelle Arthur 


MyRN 
April Stewart 


MOTION ACTORS 


VAAN 
Kouhei Takeda 


PENELO 
Yuna Mikuni 


BALTHIER 
Sean Ryan 


GAME DESIGN 
IN-GAME EVENT DESIGN 
Mizue Tanaka 

Yusuke Matsuda 

Minori Miura 


(Cur SCENE EvENTs 
Hidehito Tanba 
Yuichi Nakamura 
Yaeko Sato 

Ryoko Kato 

Sayako Ohzono 
Yusuke Kodama 
Shota Shimoda 
Masaru Taniguchi 
Rie Suzuki 


FRAN 
Hiroko Harada 


ASHE 
Mei Yoshikawa 


Bascu 
Makoto Onaga 


DIALOGUE 
Kyoko Kitahara 


BATTLE SYSTEM 
Hiroshi Tomomatsu 
Genki Yamashita 
Kazuyuki Miura 


Mar System 
Motoharu Tanaka 
Takaaki Hirose 
Naomi Fukui 


SYSTEM PROGRAMMING 


BATTLE 
Takashi Isowaki 
Noritsugu Mochizuki 


REALTIME CAMERA 
Satoshi Ogata 


CG Toot Surrorr 
Atsushi Ebisawa 


DEVELOPMENT TOOLS 
Satoshi Ogata 
Noritsugu Mochizuki 


DATABASE TECHNICAL SUPPORT 
Kenichi Matsudo 


REALTIME RENDERING 
PROGRAMMING 


MOTION DESIGN 


PLAYER CHARACTER EvENT MOTION 


Mar RENDERING 
Akihiro Yamaguchi 


CHARACTER MOTION 


Naoki Hamaguchi 


CHARACTER MODEL 
Daiki Hoshina 


VISUAL EFFECTS 
Yoshinori Tsuchida 
Daiki Hoshina 
Naoki Hamaguchi 


MENU 
Shinichi Fujisawa 
Noriyasu Arata 


Mitsuru Nagai 


ART DESIGN 


Tonny WaiMan Koo 
Akiyoshi Masuda 
Takashi Honjo 
Shiho Tamura 

Airi Yoshioka 
Ryoma Ito 
Dissacert Ikeda 
Kiyoshi Arai 


Chikako Nakano 
Nao Ikeda 
Akiyoshi Kontani 
Yoshihiro Hirota 
Ayumi Namae 
Nobuya Aoki 
Kazunari Kajio 


STORYBOARD 


Shinsaku Kozuma 
Kunihiko Noguchi 


3D MAP & 


Manabu Daishima 
Yukiko Sasaki 
Kazushi Urata 
Takato Ito 

Shinichi Mochizuki 
Hirokazu Takano 
Takeshi Sanda 
Hideaki Morita 
Daisuke Komatsu 
Kana Yamazaki 
Norifumi Nagaoka 
Tsuyoshi Okahisa 
Hiroyuki Sano 

Jun Sakurai 
‘Tatsuhiro Okamoto 
Hiroki Mitsushima 
Shin Ienaka 

Rei Fukuzawa 
Tsutomu Inagaki 


REALTIME 


Eiichiro Nakatsu 
Shinya Senzaki 
Makoto Yagishita 
Yuji Mitsuishi 
‘Toru Shiozaki 
Nozomu Nishiiri 
Kazumichi Kimura 
Yoshinari Hirata 
Minako Tsuchiya 


BACKGROUND DESIGN 


Motohiro Murakami 
Takayuki Yoshikawa 
Rinnosuke Kawai 
Yasunori Yanagawa 
Tohru Ohshita 
Daichi Nakagawa 
Yoshiyuki Shikano 
Masato Shida 

Kohji Takino 
Tsuyoshi Wada 
Nobuyuki Suzuki 
Shinpei Murakami 
Takeshi Kawamorita 
Kohki Ishinuma 
Saeko Terada 
Yasuyuki Kawamata 
Mayumi Furuzawa 
Takeo Sasaki 
Subaru Ganbe 


MODEL DESIGNERS 


Noriaki Kayanuma 
Shohei Muta 
Takeshi Miyazawa 
Masahiko Mitsunami 
Rika Ojima 
Keiichirou Takahashi 
Mitsuharu Fushie 
Chiho Kawase 
Noriyuki Komoda 


TEXTURING 


LEAD TEXTURE DESIGNERS 


Masaaki Kazeno 
Kohji Machida 
Ryotaro Hashimoto 
Haruya Ishii 

Keiji Inoue 

Takuo Ueda 
Nobuyoshi Mihara 


Texture DESIGNERS 
i Hachiro 
Nanase 

Nao Amano 

Rie Koyama 

Yutaka Kasama 
Tatsuru Nakaza 
Masato Muramatsu 
Tomomi Fujino 


BATTLE MOTION 
Tsunataro Yoshida 
Takahiro Sugita 
Yasuyuki Sogame 
Reiko Kitaichi 
Yukie Wakamoto 


BATTLE MOTION 
Satoru Uchida 
Ryo Hirao 
Daigo Nakamura 
Osamu Honma 
Tomohiro Naka 
Tadashi Soeda 
Jun Kusaka 
Mika Anzai 
Yoichiro Hori 
Ryuichi Onuma 


MENU DESIGN 


VisuAL DESIGN 
& Layour 
Satomi Hongo 
Takeshi Tateishi 
Yuka Miyamoto 
Koichi Ebe 


VISUAL EFFECTS 


Noriko Ikeda 
Fumiko Hoshino 
Yuko Hatae 


CG MOVIES 


CHARACTER MODEL 
SUPERVISORS 

Akira Iwata 
Kimitoshi Tsumura 


CHARACTER TECHNICAL 
SUPERVISORS 

Akihiro Tsuchiya 
Tetsuichiro Kitagawa 
Mitsuharu Fukai 


Set & Prop 
SUPERVISORS 
Hiroshi Kamohara 
Kazuyuki Ikumori 


ANIMATION 
SUPERVISORS 
Koichiro Shiratori 
Hirotaka Sawada 


MOTION CAPTURE 
SUPERVISOR 
Junichi Hayashi 


VFX SUPERVISORS 
Hideki Mizoguchi 
Koji Tanaka 


LIGHTING SUPERVISOR 
Kaori Sato 


COMPOSITE SUPERVISOR 
Yasuharu Yoshizawa 


Yasuhide Hino 
Micko Saka 

Yu Segoe 

Masaki Imamura 
Kazuhiro Kimura 
Ryoma Araki 
Yukihide Kimura 
Hisashi Ohshio 
Yoshiaki lizuka 
Takeshi Oda 
Toshiaki Watanabe 
Satomi Tsuchida 
Hiroko Miura 


EVENT MOTION & 
MOTION CarTuRE 
Kaoru Minemoto 
Sei Ikeda 

Mitsuki Sato 


FACIAL MOTION 
Hanae Karasawa 
Tomoyuki Arai 


CHARACTER 
EFrects 

Taiji Tsuchiya 
Nobuki Ando 


DESIGN 


Mayumi Kubota 
Makoto Ohta 
Naoto Endo 


Epitor 
Keiichi Kojima 


SEQUENCE LEADS 
Hiroyuki Honda 
Hiroshi Fujiwara 
Takeshi Tateishi 
Kazuhito Shimada 


CROWD SIMULATION 
Leaps 

Fred TY. Hui 
Kenichi Isaka 


CHARACTER MODEL DESIGNERS 
Mamoru Tagata 

Tadahiro Inoue 

Ken Yuasa 

Naomi Horigome 

Takashi Nakano 

Takeshi Maruyama 

Toshihide Funato 

Yuji Yamazaki 


CHARACTER TECHNICAL 
DESIGNERS 

Mio Tagiri 

Yoshihito Ikuta 
Masahiro Hamada 
Yujiro Tada 

Jun Usui 


Set & Prop DESIGNERS 
Hiroto Ide 

Takayuki Hayashi 
Masumi Hakamada 
Fiji Kitada 
Takafumi Nishimura 
Sanae Nakanishi 
Seth Thompson 
Takuya Suzuki 

Taku Watanabe 
Tomohiko Osugi 
Keiji Sakamoto 


ANIMATION DESIGNERS 
Yoko Abe 

Masayo Tateishi 

Satoshi Naito 

Kazuhiko Kosono 
Masahiro Nishimura 
Hikaru Murakami 
Atsushi Osako 

Tomomi Moriyasu 


MOTION CAPTURE DESIGNERS 
Tomoya Suzuki 
Hiroko Masuda 
Hiroki Minami 
Keiko Imamura 


SOUND 


ADDITIONAL COMPOSITION 
Hayato Matsuo 
Masaharu Iwata 


SYNTHESIZERS 
Keiji Kawamori 


PROGRAMMER 
Minoru Akao 


TOOL PROGRAMMER 
Satoshi Akamatsu 


Movie SOUND Eprrors 
Shojiro Nakaoka 
Makoto Ise 


SOUND Epirors 
Kenichi Mikoshiba 
Natsuko Sugiyama 
Kazuhiro Hosoe 
Rieko Shimura 


DIALoGuE EDITOR 
Natsuko Sugiyama 


Composer 
Hitoshi Sakimoto 


ORCHESTRAL ARRANGEMENT 
Hayato Matsuo 


PRODUCER 
Yuji Saito 


VEX DESIGNERS 
Shuntaro Furukawa 
Ayako Kuroda 
Yasuko Asakura 
Ren Kikuchi 
Soichi Shirakabe 
Kaoru Chikaoka 
Makoto Waragai 


CG ENGINEERS 
Kotaro Beppu 
Keisuke Miyazaki 
Taku Wakisaka 
Hirofumi Kawai 
Genichi Kawada 
Hiroki Miyazaki 
Hirotaka Sato 
Masashi Nakata 
Manabu Ishizaki 


VisUAL WORKS COORDINATORS 
Hazuki Fujimoto 

Ryosuke Inagaki 

Saika Aoki 

Momo Nakabayashi 

Norimichi Kurosawa 

Atsuko Hashimoto 

Hisako Sakurai 


Movit PRODUCERS 
Hiroshi Kuwabara 
Satoshi Tsukamoto 


PROJECT MANAGER 
Masayuki Tanaka 


Project COORDINATOR 
Masashi Kitagawa 


PROJECT ASSISTANT 
Kazuki Hamamoto 


MIXING STUDIO 
408 THX suite 
(THX pm3 certified) 
at Sony PCL Inc. 


MIXING ENGINEER 
Kazutaka Someya 


ASSISTANT ENGINEERS 
Yuka Kitazawa 

Asako Odajima 
Katsuhisa Sadayasu 


Post PRODUCTION MANAGER 
Chiaki Ikejima 


OPENING & ENDING THEMES 


Director 
Masaru 


RECORDING ENGINEER 
Toshiyuki Yoshida 


MUSICIAN COORDINATOR 
Toshiaki Ota 


PIANO 
Masato Matsuda 


PERCUSSION 
Midori Takada 


PERCUSSION 
Tomoko Kusakari 


PERCUSSION 
Marie Oishi 


TRUMPET 
Kazuya Honma Group 


TROMBONE 
Osamu Matsumoto Group 


HARP 
Hiroyuki Minami Group 


Tuba 
Kiyoshi Sato 


FLUTE 
Takashi Asahi 


FLUTE 
Yoshio Kizu 


OBOE 
Satoshi Shoji 


OBOE 
Keiko Narita 


CLARINET 
Tadashi Hoshino 


CLARINET 
Satoshi Kobayashi 


BASSOON 
Josuke Ohata . 


STRINGS 
Masatsugu Shinozaki Group 


Harp 
Tomoyuki Asakawa 


CONDUCTOR 
Koji Haishima 


RECORDING STUDIO 
Victor Studio 


COORDINATION 
IMAGINE Inc. 


“KISS ME GOOD-BYE” 


(FEATURED IN FINAL FANTASY XII) 


COMPOSER/ PRODUCER 
Nobuo Uematsu 


VOCALS/PIANO/LyRICS 
Angela Aki 


ARRANGEMENT 
Kenichiro Fukui 


STRINGS 
Gen-ittetsu Group 


GUITAR 
Mitsuhiro Ohta 


Bass 
Akira Yamamoto 


Drums & PERCUSSION 
Isao Arima 


RECORDING & MIXING 
ENGINEER 
Kenji Nakai 


RECORDING STUDIO 
ONKIO HAUS / STUDIO 1043 


SYMPHONIC POEM "HOPE” 


Taro Hakase 
Hitoshi Sakimoto 
Yuji Toriyama 
Katsumi Ohtani 


Miho Kitagawa 
Robby Wada 

HATS UNLIMITED CO.LTD. 
Bin Associates 


SUPPORTING CAST 


RAMINAS 
Nick Jameson 


ANASTASIS, DALAN 
Dwight Schultz 


MIGELO, GILGAMESH 
John DiMaggio 


Garit GREAT-CHIEF 
Michael Chinyamurindi 


VENAT 
Anita Carey 


GERUN KING 
Bernice Stegers 


BA'GAMNAN 
Steve Blum 


Kyres 


Conner Demita 


HAVHARO 
Chris Edgerly 


ADDITIONAL VOICES 
John Demita 

Scott Menville 
Jonathan Nichols 
Phil Proctor 

Jill Talley 


CG STUNT ACTORS 


Mark "Cadogan" Tacampo 
Jay "Noe" Noyes 


Keiichi "Stephan" Tada 
Yukie "Fox" Yamada 


US RECORDING 


RECORDING ENGINEERS 
STUDIOPOLIS 

Eric Lewis 

Ernie Sheesley 


Kirk Rogers 


RECORDING STUDIO 
STUDIOPOLIS 


STUDIO MANAGER 
Laura Lopez 


ASSISTANT RECORDING 
ENGINEER 
Joe Moeller 


DIALOGUE EDITORIAL 
STUDIOPOLIS 


PRODUCER 
TECHNICAL SUPERVISOR Alexander O. Smith 
Denny Densmore 

LINE PRODUCER 


DIALOGUE EDITOR Michael Hack 


Terry Reiff 
Voice DirEcTOR/CASTING 
ADR Eprtors Director 
Eric Lewis Jack Fletcher 
Ernie Sheesley 
MOTION CAPTURE 
CASTING Actors’ PRODUCTION 
Masayuki Sugahara MANAGEMENT 
(BE MINE) INFRAMINCE CO.,LTD. 
J.CLIP 
KIDT CREW 


SARAH PROJECT 
WAKAKOMA Pro 
YOUGO OFFICE 
ZENITH INC. 


CONTRACTORS 


CG Movit CREATION LiNDA Ine. / Griot Inc. 


& Support Hiroyuki H 
CGCG Inc. Masashi S: 

Ivan C Kanako Tani 
Sareana Sun Jitsuhisa Shibata 


‘Tsai Shui-Wen 
Steven Tsai 


Yuetsu Murakami 
Mamoru Kushiro 


Marty Wa Yasunobu Arahori 
Tony Wang Takaharu Tobe 
Ally Liu Nobuaki Ebihara 


Yoshihiro Ozawa 
Masashi Fujiura 


Cheng So-Young 
Huang Burning 


Yang Po-chin Tomohiro Yonemichi 
Yang Kuo-Wei 

Fish Hong Slicon Studio 

Fionn Yen Koji Matsumoto 
Wa Li-Ya 


Wang Yao-Cheng 


Digital Frontier Inc. 
Chan Pi-Ching 


Chiang Chu-Tzu 2D FietD & GADGET 
Hsiao Feng-Yi DESIGN Surrort 
Coddy Hsieh KUSANAGI Co., LTD. 
‘Tonny Fang Nobuhito Sue 

Eric Wang Hideyasu Narita 

Alen Fan; Ayu Kawamoto 


Lu Tung-Yuan 
ch 


suMewae 
Paggy Liou 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT 


LEAD PRODUCTION 
CoorDINATOR 
Hiroaki Kato 


Yoji Nakaza 


Music PRODUCTION 
Basiscape CO.,LTD. 


PRODUCTION ASSISTANTS 
Yuko Fujii 
Emiko Nishiyama 


PRODUCTION COORDINATOR 
Hiroyuki Ogawa 


OE OT LT a ecpe  ca S 


| LOCALIZATION 


| GENERAL MANAGER 
| Masashi Hiramatsu 


| LOCALIZATION 

| Directors 

| Saroko Kondo 
Tomoko Kondo 


| 
| LOCALIZATION 

| CoorDINaAToRS 
| Seiko Braswell 

| Satoshi Toyoda 


| PUBLICITY 


Pusuicity PRODUCER 
Yuka Naito 


Pusuicity STAFF 
Ayako Kawamoto 
Emiko Sato 


MANAGERS 
Shin Yamamoto 
Takayuki Komine 


MANAGER 
Ken Narita 


LOCALIZATION SUPERVISOR 
Kazuyoshi Tashiro 


TRANSLATORS 
Alexander O. Smith 
Joseph Reeder 


EDITOR 
Morgan Morris Rushton 


PUBLICITY ASSISTANT 
Shiho Tsuyuki 
Hiroyuki Toyama 


GENERAL PRODUCER 
Koji Taguchi 


TECHNICAL RESEARCH 


ENGINEERS 
Shingo Niwano 
Yasushi Shimizu 


Takayuki Arai 


COORDINATOR 
Junko Kuroda 


LINE COORDINATORS 


STAFF 

Takako Yamashita 
Miyuki Miyazaki 
Nobuyuki Kashihara 


| LEGAL & INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 


GENERAL 
MANAGER 
Yasuhiko Hasegawa 


RATINGS 
| RAaTINGs Abvisors 
| Reiko Kondo 
| Sueko Kogai 


STAFF 

Takahiro Fujii 
Hiroshi Harada 
Ayako Hino 


| QUALITY ASSURANCE 


COORDINATOR 
Kiminori Ohya 


ASSISTANT COORDINATORS 
Takafumi Matsui 
Kentaro Hayashi 


TECHNICAL ENGINEERS 
Kazuya Okamoto 
Hisato Iwatsuki 


TECHNICAL ASSISTANT 
Yusuke Sadamasa 


TESTERS 

Yoshito Nabeshima 
Yusuke Kitamura 
Kazuki Yasuda 
Hidefumi Sakama 
Kengo Murata 
Mitsugu Kobayashi 
Susumu Kurihara 
Masaki Nakamura 


_— EEE 


Ryouta Minami 
Shintaro Gunji 
Noriyoshi Ohta 
Kenji Nishikawa 
Toru Saito 

Ai Sato 

Kentaro Noguchi 
Jun Okazaki 

Mei Ito 

Kousuke Sone 
Masaki Takatsu 
Takafumi Itakura 
Takaaki Hagiwara 
Tomomi Chigira 
Ellie Horiuchi 
Yuki Mizuno 
Mao Fujimura 
Kunihiro Matsue 
Yutaro Nagatomo 
Daisuke Kobayashi 
Yasuhiro Yamada 
Kazumasa Oshida 
.and All QA Staff 


GENERAL MANAGER 
Koji Yamashita 


TECHNICAL DIRECTOR 
Hideyuki Kato 


MANAGER 
Yukihiro Shibuya 


SQUARE ENIX, INC. 


QUALITY ASSURANCE INFORMATION CENTER 
MANAGER SUPERVISORS 
David "Ribs" Carrillo Carl Hidalgo 

Sean Michael 
ASSISTANT QA MANAGER 
Mohammed A.C. Wright 


SENIOR QA 
COORDINATOR 
Mathew Clift 


INFORMATION CENTER 


Herrera 


Pusuic RELATIONS 
Sonia Im 
Charlie Sinhaseni 


Frederick K. Hashi 


QA Associares 
Jason Sanders 
Glenn Lee 


PRODUCT MARKETING 
Fernando Bustamante 
Felice V. Wa 

Philip Ser 

Issei Shimizu 


QA CoorDINATOR 
Bryan D. Chen 


ASSISTANT COORDINATORS 
Johnny Fournier 
Jeremy Goldsmith 


QA TEAM 

Erik Carpenter 
Cris Y. Cheng, 
Robert Dryburgh 
Darryl D. Duncan 
Lucas Goodman 
Darren S. Harvey 


PROJECT COORDINATION 
Kumiko Hakushi 

Naoko Yamamura-Rice 
Emi Maurer 


MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS 
Patrick H. Cervantes 
Jonathan Cooperson 


Kevin Kim Tim Law 
Eric Lea Wilbur Lin 
Noel Lynch Parker Sapp 
Nick Madonna 

Scott Melzer SALES 


Ron Kurtz 

Alaine C. de Leon 
Kanji Tashiro 
‘Traci Jones 
Shundea K. Brooks 


Francisco Miranda 
Chintan Patel 
Joseph Pirante 
Thomas Ri 
Fredrick Sykes 
Noah Woo 


EXecuTive DIRECTOR, 
SALES & MARKETING 
Shinji Furami 


QA TRANSLATORS 
Arthur T. Kawamoto 
Elijah Smolko 
SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT 
LOCALIZATION & Shinji Hashimoto 
QA Director 
Yutaka Sano VP, LEGAL AFFAIRS 
& GENERAL COUNSEL 
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF Neal Black 
COMMUNITY & SERVICE 
Yasu Kurosawa PRESIDENT & COO 
Daishiro Okada 
SENIOR MANAGER 
OF OPERATIONS 


Franko F, Fonseca 


INFORMATION CENTER 
MANAGER 
Walter Brame 


SPECIAL THANKS 


Mariko Suzuki (YOSHITAKA AMANO O 
Yuki Someya (YOSHITAKA AMANO OFFICE) 

Kumiko Sacki (Basiscape CO.,LTD.) 

Shutaro Yokoyama 

Daisuke Tsumanuma 

Futoshi Katsuyama . 
Nobuo Ito 

Naoto Uenaka 

Yusuke Matsui 

Madoka Tanaka 

Naoko Yoshiyama 

Tetsuya Hiraoka ’ 
Akira Kashiwagi 

‘Takashi Idogawa 

Kensuke Matsushita 

Masako Miyoshi 

Soushi Yoshida 

Izumi Tsukushi 

Hidemi Matsuzuka 

Miyako Kibe 

Kensuke Tanaka 

Kyoko Saito 

Kaori Shibayama 

Kenichi "Gustav" Iwao 

Hironobu Sakaguchi 


ALL FINAL FANTASY XII STAFF 
ALL SQUARE ENIX STAFF 


.and ALL FANS OF FINAL FANTASY 


T —_——* 
Ooporeyy IHX 5-FORLE 


EXECUTIVE PRODUCERS 


Youichi Wada 
Akitoshi Kawazu 


The following warranty and support information applies only to customers in the United States and Canada, and only to 
original consumer purchasers of products covered by this warranty. 


LIMITED WARRANTY 


Square Enix, Inc. (“SEI”) warrants to the original purchaser of the enclosed product (the “Product”) that the media containing 
the Product (which includes any replacement media provided under this warranty) will be free from defects in materials and 
workmanship for a period of ninety (90) days from the date of purchase (the “Warranty Period”). SEI’s entire liability and your 
exclusive remedy under this limited warranty shall be, at SEI’s option, repair or replacement, without charge, of the whole or 
affected portion of any Product that proves to be defective in material or workmanship during the Warranty Period. 


EXCLUSIONS FROM WARRANTY 

This warranty applies only to defects in factory materials and factory workmanship. Any condition caused by abuse, 
unreasonable use, mistreatment, neglect, accident, improper operation, destruction or alteration, or repair or maintenance 
attempted by anyone other than SEI is not a defect covered by this warranty. Parts and materials subject to wear and tear in 
normal usage are not covered by this warranty. 


IMPLIED WARRANTIES AND INCIDENTAL AND CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES 
Under state or provincial law, you may be entitled to the benefit of certain implied warranties. ANY APPLICABLE IMPLIED 
WARRANTIES, INCLUDING WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR 

PURPOSE, WILL CONTINUE IN FORCE ONLY DURING THE WARRANTY PERIOD. Some states and provinces do 


not allow limitations on how long an implied warranty lasts, so the above limitation may not apply to you. 


NEITHER SEI NOR YOUR RETAIL DEALER HAS ANY RESPONSIBILITY FOR ANY INCIDENTAL OR 
CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES RELATING TO YOUR USE OF THE PRODUCT, INCLUDING, WITHOUT 
LIMITATION, ANY DAMAC FOR LOSS OF DATA OR LOSS OF PROFIT, OR FOR ANY INCIDENTAL 
EXPENSES, LOSS OF TIME, OR INCONVENIENCE. As some states and provinces do not allow the exclusion or 


limitation of incidental or consequential damage, the foregoing limitation or exclusion may not apply to you. 


HOW TO OBTAIN WARRANTY SERVICE 

To obtain warranty service, please send the defective Product, together with a copy of your original sales receipt, your return 
address, name and telephone number, should contact be necessary, and a brief note describing the defect to SEI at the 
following address: Square Enix, Inc., Customer Warranty, 999 Sepulveda Blvd 3rd Floor, El Segundo, CA, 90245. 

THE DEFECTIVE PRODUCT MUST BE POSTMARKED WITHIN NINETY (90) DAYS FROM THE DATE OF 
PURCHASE. PROOF OF PURCHASE IN THE FORM OF A DATED RECEIPT MUST BE INCLUDED TO OBTAIN 
WARRANTY SERVICE. 

The shipping costs for sending the defective Product to SEI is a sole responsibility of the Customer. SEI will not be liable for 
any damage or loss that occurs during shipping. To minimize loss during shipping, you may opt to use a tracking method 
when shipping. 


If you have warranty questions, you can also contact our Customer Warranty department at (310) 846-0345 during its hours 
of operation, Monday — Friday, 9:00 am — 6:00 pm, Pacific Standard Time. 


CUSTOMER SUPPORT 
For customer support and technical support questions, please call (310) 846-0345 during the following hours of operation: 
Monday — Friday, 9:00 am — 6:00 pm, Pacific Standard Time. 


FOR INFORMATION AND SERVICES BY SQUARE ENIX, INC., 
GO TO WWW.SQUARE-ENIX.COM 


NOTICE: The Product, this manual, and all other accompanying documentation, written or electronic, are protected by 
United States copyright law, trademark law and international treaties. Unauthorized reproduction is subject to civil and 
criminal penalties. All rights reserved. 


SQUARE ENIX. 


©2006 SQUARE ENIX CO., LTD. All Rights Reserved. CHARACTER DESIGN: Akihiko Yoshida. FINAL FANTASY, 
SQUARE ENIX, and the SQUARE ENIX logo are registered trademarks or trademarks of Square Enix Co., Ltd. 


